---
layout: page
title: ""
date: 2013-07-12 20:40
comments: false
sharing: true
footer: true
---

# Consulting

## Services Offered

### Development

Have an idea that you want made real? Don't know a database from a programming
language? We understand that you just want your idea up and running as soon as
possible without getting stuck in the technical weeds. Let us take care of the
technical problems, and let you focus on your business.

At [Hawkwood Group](https://www.hawkwood.group) we offer a variety of services
to take your idea live. We can create anything from the simple pages to showcase
your work all the way up to rich single page applications with complicated user
interfaces. We have the expertise to craft every single part of your next
project specifically for you, and even host it if you wish.

### Maintenance

Have an existing website that's not up to snuff? Are you cringing internally
when you direct customers to your site? Customers complaining about slow load
times?

Did you know that website speed affects both how high Google ranks your website,
as well as the conversion rate for customers? Many business owners fear the cost
and time of a complete rewrite, but often there are simple steps that we can
take to drastically improve your website's performance. Let us take a look at
your website and tell you what simple steps we can take to dramatically improve
how quickly it loads.

Have a new design in mind or on paper, but lost in a sea of CSS and HTML? We
have extensive experience reworking existing websites with new designs. We can
easily make your website look brand new, without changing the admin pages that
you've become comfortable with.

### Hosting

Are you paying an arm and a leg for slow hosting that goes down consistently? We
can take your existing application and run it on the same hardware that powers
Fortune 500 companies, possibly for less money than you're paying now. Why
shouldn't your business have a reliable website?

## Contact

If you're ready to stop worrying about the tech and get back to your business,
then we're [ready](mailto:consulting@hawkwood.group) to help you out.
