---
layout: post
title: "Time, Attention, and Pairing"
date: 2013-10-25 21:36
comments: true
categories:
---

[Merlin Mann](http://www.merlinmann.com) gives a great talk about Time
and Attention. The gist of his talk is that in order to create great
work, you need to balance time vs. attention. Without using your time,
you'll never create. But you must use your attention to determine if
you're creating something great. Great producers balance between these
two to both produce, and produce good work.

Part of my new job at [Pivotal Tracker](http://www.pivotaltracker.com)
involves pair programming. While a lot of my programming friends express
doubt about pairing, I'm very impressed with both how productive I am
pairing, and how quickly I'm learning the code base while pairing.

The way that a good pair switches between who is "driving" reminds me of
Merlin's talk. The person who is typing is responsible for producing,
while the person who isn't is responsible for ensuring that the pair is
headed in the right direction.

It's hard to alternate between time and attention effectively when
working alone. There's no overt signal to when one is using time or
attention, making it easy to mistake "research" (reading Wikipedia) as
using your attention. As a pair this balance is much easier to achieve,
because each member is tasked with one role, and it's obvious when that
role is not being fulfilled. The non-driving member can't goof off on
Reddit or Wikipedia for the sake of "research" because it will prevent
the driving member from working. And the driving member can't slow down
too much without the other member taking over typing from them.
