---
layout: post
title: "Org Mode"
date: 2013-10-27 14:21
comments: true
categories: [organization]
---

Recently I've taken interest in making myself more productive, and at
least so far it's going well. I personally attribute part of my current
productivity to a new "shut up and get back to work" mentality, and
partly to a new (to me) organization system.

I know there are literally thousands of posts related to productivity
and organization systems, but there are shockingly few related to my
system of choice, Emacs. I'll be covering the basics of org-mode, with
more configuration and workflow information in a future post.

Org-mode is both an Emacs library, and a file format. The org form is
designed to be both human readable, and powerful when parsed; it
resembles a markdown designed for outlines. Like many other Emacs
features, org-mode doesn't enforce one usage style or another. Instead
it provides a goodie bag of functions designed to maniuplate org files.

The basic element is the headline, which is prefixed with a number of
asteriks. The number of asteriks controls which lines are children of
which. While headlines can remain with their title alone, there are also
a number of optional features that can be set.

The most common headline feature is a todo state, which by default is
one of "TODO", "IN-PROGRESS", and "DONE". You can configure multiple
types of todo states that flow from one to another in whichever way you
want. I personally use the defaults, along with the values of "TICKLE",
"REFERENCE", and "ABANDONED". A lot of org-mode features are sensitive
to TODO state, for example "TODO" items won't go in the daily agenda.
