---
layout: post
title: "False Novelty"
date: 2018-12-19 19:20
comments: true
categories:
---

# Introduction

The internet is starting to worry me.

This is a problem for me. I make my money on the internet, and I also spend a
lot of time on it for entertainment. Beginning to worry about the internet is a
bit like looking at your pet kitten and realizing that those tiger stripes are
real and not merely an adorable coloration. It's a slow growing fear that you
might be living with something much more dangerous than you thought.

What this post is not about is handwringing about “kids these days”, or looking
back on a (fake) idyllic past. Humans have been capable of shocking brutality
for a very long time. Ask any student of history. Many of the flaws in the
internet are actually the flaws of humanity laid bare under the scrutiny of us
all. Next time you worry about incivility on Twitter, think about all those
“nice” old folk who had smiling pictures taken around a lynching victim back in
the 1950s.

Nor am I particularly worried about short form entertainment and pining for the
days when people read books. Our elders have been warning about how the new form
of entertainment since back when books were the new form of entertainment. If
books didn't destroy humanity, why should the internet?

What I am concerned about is the rise of on demand, algorithmically customized
entertainment available in your pocket. What Facebook, Twitter, Reddit, YouTube
etc. are changing into is something subtly different and more scary than just
the "social media" that we've gotten used to over the past decade. The ubiquity
and algorithmic nature of these sites have wide reaching and subtle impacts that
we're just beginning to notice.

## On Novelty

It's a stretch to say that curiosity makes us human, but we are definitely one
of the more curious species around. Humans need novelty; a bored human is a
miserable human.

What's less understood is that novelty also gives us our past. There is
surprising little correlation between the objective amount of time your life
takes and the subjective amount of time that you experience. Any school child
desperate for the bell to ring is intimately familiar with the basics of this
process. It turns out the exact same thing works for memories: unique
experiences create strong memories that anchor other memories into place. These
anchors affect the subjective amount of time that your memory takes up,
expanding or compressing your experienced timeline accordingly.

Thus a bored human is both emotionally unhappy, and is also robbed of their
subjective lifetime, with their own memories compressed into the blink of an
eye.

## On Collective Experiences

Collective experiences create bonds among people. The stronger the experience,
the stronger the formed bond is.

This is why sports fans can bond around a specific game or championship, or why
war buddies are often very close despite differences that would normally drive
people apart. It's also why people of the same generation tend to be closer than
people of different generations, as the same generation cohort will share the
same memories of culturally and historically important events. People of my
generation remember where they were on 9/11, an experience not shared with most
of Gen Z.

We once lived in a time and place where culturally important experiences were
shared experiences by default. There simply wasn't the surplus money to create a
large number of plays, operas, or movies for the vast majority of human history.
For the past 400 years if you ever got to see a play, there is a high chance
that it was Shakespeare. When Americans went to the box office in previous
century, there were a limited number of movies available. When the original Star
Wars was released into theaters, it's estimated that 40% of the American public
went to go see it. That's one hell of a shared experience!

# Changes

## A Deluge of Novelty

First, the obvious: the Internet has an effectively infinite capacity for
novelty. On the face of it, this is good! We've established that humans need
novelty, so an infinite fire hose if it cannot hurt, right?

Haha, what kind of article do you think this is? In a classic case of "too much
of a good thing is actually a bad thing", it appears that our need for novelty
can absolutely be overrun. One novel experience every few days stands out in the
human memory. One hundred similarly novel experiences just blend together into
nothingness.

An analogy. Most wealthy humans eat two different types of meals: meals for
sustenance and meals for enjoyment, with the latter being much more expensive.
Fancy meals are often dinner, and meals like breakfast and lunch tend to be in
the "calories so I don't die please" variety.

With this in place: imagine the last nice dinner you had. If you're like me, you
can remember the wine you had, the appetizer, and the entree. Now, imagine what
you had for breakfast _yesterday_. If you're anything like me, you probably can
barely remember what you had for breakfast this morning, let alone yesterday.

Now, what do you think would happen if you had a fancy dinner every night? How
long would it take before Steak Tartar and a top shelf Pinot Noir would just
blend into the background of your everyday existence?

For whatever reason, everything you view on Reddit and Twitter seems to fool
your novelty sensors. Like McDonald's famous "disappearing calories", these
sites fool you into thinking you're discovering new experiences, but leave
behind a vast nothingness titled "Reddit was here". The instantly available and
endless stream of funny gifs, pictures, and videos quickly became the nightly
New York Strip Steak; theoretically nice, but actually quite mundane.

## Fake Companionship

Social media creates a false feeling of community and connection.

First, Connection and community require repeated interactions with a group of
people. One off comments and flame wars don't count, doubly so if it's the only
interaction you have with a given username. Comments might be fun to read and
write, but they do not reliably produce the feeling of connection that our
deeply social species needs.

Second, there is a _massive_ difference between face to face and verbal
communication. Larger still between face to face and textual communication.
Humans use inflection and facial expressions to communicate the vast majority of
what we're thinking and how we're feeling to each other, and the conversion to
text strips it all away. We've dealt with this in the form of books and mail for
quite a long time, but that text was supplemental to daily interactions. Now
text based communication is beginning to replace face to face interactions all
across society, leaving a people largely misunderstood or unheard.

And finally, these shallow communities create a false sense of majority
experience. Humans naturally want to feel like they're with the majority, a
holdover from the days when ostracization meant certain death. Online
communities with inscrutable usernames make it _feel_ like you're with the
majority, even when you aren't. At its most benign this creates moments when
"everyone" knows about a meme or idea, when in reality only a tiny number of
people have any clue what you're talking about. At the least benign this is how
you create extremists.

## The Paradox of Choice

Customized entertainment used to be shockingly rare, to the point where it
basically never happened. For the vast majority of humans over the vast majority
of time you either made your own entertainment (sport, exploration, partying,
etc.), or it was given to you by a gatekeeper (plays, music, Hollywood). Only
the richest of the rich could afford custom entertainment, including the kings
and highest nobles.

And you know what? It seems to have ruined some of them. Boredom and depression
are not uncommon historical nobility, with the bored prince being a trope for a
good reason. There's a reason why the Buddha was said to find the endless
pleasures of his father's palace to be empty and unfulfilling.

I strongly suspect that this has something to do with the [Paradox of
Choice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Paradox_of_Choice). Knowing that some
form of entertainment was literally customized for you allows the human brain to
demand utter perfection, with entirely predictable results.

Don't get me wrong, kings had it better than their serfs. Between starving to
death and not, I'll take “not” every time. But if you're looking for a surefire
road to a good life, having a court full of people trying to curry your favor
and entertain you does not seem to be an effective strategy.

Now with smart phones, we all carry a digital court in our pocket, ready to
serve up entertainment at any moment. This digital court is watching our every
move, constantly tweaking what it sends our way in order to please us, far more
diligent and skilled than any court of old. I wonder how it'll go this time
around?

Except, the comparison isn't quite correct. We do have customized entertainment,
but it's not for us. The court was trying to please the king, the algorithm is
trying to engage us, not entertain us.

This distinction is subtle, but critical. The point of the social media is to
sell ads, full stop. The only success metric is how long you stare at the app,
which converts directly to ad revenue. This metric is euphemistically called
"engagement".

If the company can enrich your life while increasing engagement, that's a
fantastic win win. If the company can hurt you while increasing engagement
further, then they will do that instead. It's not that the companies are willing
to hurt you to increase engagement, it's that your well being doesn't even
factor into the equation. Any company that's foolish enough to stop and worry
about this is quickly overtaken by the social site without such scruples

You might be tempted to assume that humans would never be so foolish as to
engage in behavior that makes them miserable, and you would be completely wrong.
Observe the number of people around you who regularly trade long term happiness
for short term pleasure, even when they express a desire to stop. This includes
everyone from the office worker who wishes they could stop eating that last
cupcake all the way to the addict who knows they're dying slowly but just cannot
stop.

You might think that comparing social media to a heroin addict is too much, and
maybe that's fair. Nobody to my knowledge has died because of Instagram, at
least not directly. But ask yourself, are you actually _happy_ when you're
staring at Instagram, Reddit, or Twitter? Is there a little voice in the back of
your head saying that maybe you should stop? To this day it still stuns me how
many people I personally know who wish they could stop using site X, but end up
spending _hours_ a day using it.

## Consequences

Change is neither inherently good or bad, it just is. I personally find the
argument of "change, therefore panic" unconvincing, so that's not what I'm
trying to say here. What I am asserting is that I'm noticing not just changes in
people's choices in entertainment, but changes in people's overall personality
and behavior that I find distressing. I worry that these changes are resulting
in people less capable of handling the challenges that life sends their way, and
less happy with the outcomes of their own choices.

The biggest that I've seen personally is the loss of focus and the need for
constant entertainment, almost like a collective ADD. When entertainment stopped
being something that you went and did and became something ubiquitous, it seems
that we lost our ability to tolerate any period of silence.

The test for this is easy: tell me how long you can put your phone away for.
There is a time and a place for both cell phones and entertainment, but that
time and place is not “every second” and “every where”. It's distressing how
many people report a feeling of anxiety when separated from their phone, as if
they've lost track of what object controls what.

The most worrying is a diminishing ability to connect with other people. If a
bored human is a miserable human, a lone human becomes a dead human quickly. I
fear that the phone has become more interesting than people, producing a number
of people with crippling social anxiety over their lack of social practice.
Sociologists have noted a marked drop in teen dating, talking, and sexual
behavior in the past decade or so. And while everyone certainly hails the
matching drop in teenage pregnancy and murder, I don't think anyone is
particularly stoked about the matching rise in teenage anxiety, loneliness,
depression, and suicide.


# Recommendations

I honestly don't know.
